Gregorian Churches should not be places where one person preaches the gospel every week. Instead of sermons, each church gathering will involve open discussions, testimonies, spiritual workshops, and collaborative learning guided by the Priests and Shamans. They should be like spiritual community centers — welcoming places of rest, gathering, discussion, and joy. All Priests of the Gregorian Church should function more as social workers than pastors. Churches should provide breakfast, lunch, and dinner for anyone whether they are a member or not. More affluent members should work with the Priest to provide employment for the less affluent members. There should be a clear partnership between the church and corporations to provide employment channels. Churches should also provide free healthcare for anyone. Churches should be the center of civic life. Churches should be the town square. Everyone is an equal in the church. The Priest is just the manager and facilitator.

Some churches might have teams of Priests depending on demand. The way it will work is that Priests will train as Shamans (monks essentially) for ten years. After their decade of training they can then be promoted to Priest and be assigned to a church or they can remain a Shaman for the rest of their life. It is their choice. Shamans will dedicate the entirety of their lives to the church. The church will provide everything the Shamans' need. If Shamans choose not to become Priests, then they cannot marry and will never be paid a salary. Priests can marry and have children once they finish their training and will be paid a salary with benefits. To enter training, Shaman's must be a baptized member of the church with at least a bachelor's degree. The ones who choose to remain Shamans will collectively train the Shamans in training, including those who wish to become Priests. While Shamans serve as spiritual guides and trainers, Priests take on civic leadership within the church, including administering rituals, managing staff and finances, and coordinating with external institutions.
