God created the universe through the big bang about 13.8 billion years ago. In the beginning, God created spacetime and energy. Space expanded quickly and matter formed. Within the first three minutes, fundamental particles like quarks, leptons (electrons), and neutrinos formed, then quarks combined into protons and neutrons. Then, a few different atoms formed through nucleosynthesis of protons, neutrons, and electrons. About 380,000 years later, heavier atoms formed and light emerged. After 100 million years, stars began to form. After about 500 million to 1 billion years, galaxies began to form and black holes emerged.

God created the proto-galaxy that would become the Milky Way around 13.6 billion years ago. 12 billion years ago, the Milky Way expanded rapidly in size. By 8 billion years ago, the Milky Way had evolved into a disk. God created the Sun within the Milky Way about 4.6 billion years ago from a dense pocket of gas and dust that collapsed under gravity until there was enough pressure to ignite nuclear fusion. God created the Earth about 4.5 billion years ago from the leftover debris that had formed a protoplanetary disk around the Sun.

3.8 billion years ago, God created the first microbial life on Earth. 2 billion years ago, God evolved those organisms into complex cells or eukaryotes. 600 million years ago, God evolved those eukaryotes into multicellular life. 500 million years ago, God started the Cambrian Explosion where he evolved multicellular life into all sorts of new organisms. 460 million years ago, God moved plants and other life onto land.

380 million years ago, God evolved fish and sent vertebrates onto land. 310 million years ago, God evolved reptiles that can lay eggs without water. 230 million years ago, God evolved dinosaurs and then early mammals. 55 million years ago, God evolved primates and began expanding their brains. 

About 6 million years ago, God split hominins from other apes. About 2.5 million years ago, God started evolving more advanced culture in hominins through tool use. About 300,000 years ago, humanity had emerged from evolution and then language and even more advanced culture emerged. About 12,000 years ago, God taught humanity agriculture and from there our civilizations accelerated in development.
